| Paper number: P1344R1
| Topic: Pre/Post vs. Enspects/Exsures
| Author: Nathan Myers
| Email: ncm@cantrip.org
| Audience: CWG
| Status: As approved EWG
| Date: 2019-02-20

## Pre/Post vs. Expects/Ensures

The Contracts proposal went in with the choice of keywords "expects"
and "ensures", without justification. This is a problem because the
words are a source of repeated and continued confusion everywhere
they appear. [-The choice in the proposal matches Microsoft's private
version, which- / It] was good enough for the proposal, but is not good
enough for C++20. A much better choice, for reasons to be explained,
would be "pre" and "post'.

In every discussion of contract provisions I have had where the
distinction between pre- and postconditions matters, at least one
participant (often enough, your author) mixed up "ensures" and
"expects", at least once. Words--at least, English words--that
both begin and end with the same letter will always be confused,
absent extra attention stolen from other concerns. Programmers'
attention is too precious to squander keeping unnecessarily similar
words straight.

Our Standards identify, for most library functions, "Preconditions"
and "Postconditions".  We have always had the option to change them
to "Expects:" and "Ensures:", and it has been suggested, but there
has never been any enthusiasm for such a change: what we have has
been proven to work well.

An excerpt from Richard Feyman's book, "Surely You're Joking":

> When the students were explaining something to me in Portuguese,
> I couldn't understand it very well, even though I knew a certain
> amount of Portuguese. It was not exactly clear to me whether they
> had said "increase," or "decrease," or "not increase," or "not
> decrease," or "decrease slowly." But when they struggled with
> English, they'd say "ahp" or "doon," and I knew which way it was,
> even though the pronunciation was lousy and the grammar was all
> screwed up. 

"Ensures" and "expects" are our "not increase" and "not decrease".
It matters which one we mean when we write it or say it, but it
is all too easy to say or write the wrong one, and to hear or 
read the wrong one.

### Convenience

If the minefield of confusion were not enough, "ensures" and
"expects" are twice as long as "pre" and "post".  This is not
a complaint about typing, but about reading: longer words and
similar words are processed more slowly. It is about displacing
other, more immediately meaningful text, possibly beyond the
margin of easy reading, or to another line or off the screen.

The same problem affects speech: two syllables for the same
idea is worse than one.

>  Don't use a five-dollar word when a fifty-cent word will do.”
>  ― Mark Twain `

"Ensures" and "expects" may not be five-dollar words, but they
cost too much.

[It was further noted in WG that "ensure" and "ensures" have 
opposite senses, regarding the party engaged, a large difference
for a single letter.]

### Proposal:

Change "expects" and "ensures" in the WD definition of contracts
to (respectively) "pre" and "post" for C++20.

SF F  N  A SA
11 21 8  2 2

### Wording:

Amend N4800 as follows.

1. In 9.11.4.1 Syntax [dcl.attr.contract.syn], paragraph 1, change

>  `[ [ expects` contract-level opt : conditional-expression `] ]`
>  `[ [ ensures` contract-level opt identifier opt : conditional-expression `] ]`

to 

>  `[ [ pre` contract-level opt : conditional-expression `] ]`
>  `[ [ post` contract-level opt identifier opt : conditional-expression `] ]`

2. In paragraph 2, change

> A contract-attribute-specifier using `expects` is a precondition.

to

> A contract-attribute-specifier using `pre` is a precondition.

3. In paragraph 3, change
  
>  A contract-attribute-specifier using `ensures` is a postcondition.

to

> A contract-attribute-specifier using `post` is a postcondition.

4. In 14.1 [cpp.cond] paragraph 6, table 16, change lines

> `ensures` 201806L
> `expects` 201806L

to

> `post` 201806L
> `pre`  201806L

moving both above `unlikely` to maintain lexicographical order.

4. In 15.4.1.4 Detailed specifications [structure.specifications]
paragraph 3.4, example, change `[[expects]]` to `[[pre:` ... `]]`.

5. In 15.5.4.3.2 Macro names [macro.names] paragraph 2, change

> identifiers `expects` or `ensures`

to 

> identifiers `pre` or `post`

6. In each example in 9.11.4 [dcl.attr.contract], change each
use of `[[expects` to `[[pre`, and `[[ensures` to `[[post`.

7. In each example in 10.6.2 [class.virtual], change each use of
`[[expects` to `[[pre`.

