| Document Number: | N4724                                           |
| -----------------|-------------------------------------------------|
| Date:            | 2018-02-06                                      |
| Reply to:        | gorn@microsoft.com                              |


Editor's report for the Coroutines TS
===================================

## New papers

- N4723 is the current working draft. It replaces N4680. This is the same version of the document that is published on the ISO web site with a few editorial changes described below.  
- N4724 is this Editor's Report for the Coroutines TS.
- P0057R8 is N4723 rebased onto C++17.

## Changes between N4680 and ISO/IEC TS 22277

Applied the changes requested by ISO to publish the TS.

- Replaced the cover page with ISO page.
- Added ISO mandated foreword.
- s/Technical Specification/this document.
- [intro.defs] Reorder bullets as requested by ISO.
- Add dated reference to ISO/IEC 14882:2014 in [intro.scope]
- Remove page headers
- Remove paragraph numbers from page footers
- Remove page breaks between short Clauses
- [intro.compliance] Conformance requirements for this specification ~~are~~<u>shall be</u> the same as those ...

## Changes between ISO/IEC TS 22277 and N4723

- Replaced the ISO cover page with working draft cover page.
- Remove ISO foreword.
- Restore page headers.
- Restore paragraph numbers in page footers.
- [stmt.jump] Fix introductory sentence:<br>
  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~~In paragraph 1 add two productions to the grammar:~~<br>
  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<u>Add _coroutine-return-statement_ to the grammar production _jump-statement_:</u><br>
- [support.coroutine] Remove unneeded `std::` in `<experimental/coroutine>` synopsis:<br>
  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;`template <class P> struct hash<`~~std::~~`experimental::coroutine_handle<P>>;`<br>
  

## Acknowledgments

We wish to thank all of the reviewers.

