# P1159R0 - Type Erased Iterators for modern C++

__Author__: Thomas Russell \<thomas.russell97@googlemail.com\>  
__Date__: 2nd July 2018  
__Audience__: Library Evolution Working Group (LEWG)

## Abstract
This paper proposes adding the class template `std::any_iterator` - a type-erased iterator which can be used where physical encapsulation is desired but the generality of iterators is beneficial. It also proposes the helper alias templates: `std::any_input_iterator`, `std::any_output_iterator`, `std::any_forward_iterator`, `std::any_bidirectional_iterator` and `std::any_random_access_iterator`.

A sample implementation and the latest version of this proposal can be found at: https://github.com/Shaktal/any_iterator.

## Table of Contents
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Example Usage](#example-usage)
  - [Memory Allocation](#memory-allocation)
  - [User-defined Types](#user-defined-types)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
- [Prior Art](#prior-art)
- [Impact on the standard](#impact-on-the-standard)
  - [Interaction with Ranges](#interaction-with-ranges)
  - [Interaction with Modules](#interaction-with-modules)
- [Wording](#wording)
  - [Synopsis](#synopsis)
  - [Specification](#specification)
- [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)
- [References](#references)

## Motivation
Iterators (and soon, ranges also) are a powerful and generic abstraction idiom in C++. They allow library and application developers to write their functions restricted only on the properties that they actually need (traversal requirements, dereference type, etc.).

However, when looking through a production code-base, it is not uncommon to see code that looks like the following:

```c++
// application_algorithm.h
struct SomeUDT {
    void getSomeObjects(std::vector<Object>& objects,
        const std::vector<std::string>& names);
};

// application_algorithm.cpp
void SomeUDT::getSomeObjects(std::vector<Object>& objects, 
    const std::vector<std::string>& names)
{
    for (const auto& name : names) {
        Object myObject = getObject(name);
        objects.push_back(std::move(myObject));
    }
}

// some_caller.cpp
std::map<std::string_view, Object> objectMap;
SomeUDT udt;

template <auto Projector>
using ProjectionIterator = projection_iterator<Projector>;
using ValueType = decltype(objectMap)::value_type;
std::vector<std::string> names{
    ProjectionIterator<&ValueType::first>(begin(objectMap)),
    ProjectionIterator<&ValueType::first>(end(objectMap))};
std::vector<Object> results;
udt.getSomeObjects(results, names);

std::copy(
    std::make_move_iterator(begin(results)), 
    std::make_move_iterator(end(results)),
    ProjectionIterator<&ValueType::second>(begin(objectMap)));
```

This is, of course, unnecessarily restrictive on the caller of this algorithm; the implementation of `getSomeObjects` doesn't use the fact that `std::vector` is contiguous, they are just interested in having some output range in which to put `Object` objects. It also requires that I have a contiguous vector of `std::string` objects to call it. If I have a range of valid `std::string_view` objects, I have to jump through hoops to use this function, and impose a potentially significant performance penalty.

On the other hand, we are told when designing enterprise-scale software to employ physical design principals. Having to declare the majority of our algorithms as function templates breaks physical encapsulation and can result in complaints of code-bloat, ugliness and increased compilation-time. Thus we are often reduced to writing code for the most common case; using concrete types and being overly restrictive.

Generic programming techniques (such as accepting arbitrary iterator types through templates) also prevent various ubiquitous OOP techniques such as inheritance and run-time polymorphism, again making some developers reluctant to adopt them.

Using type-erasure is the idiomatic way to solve this problem in C++, and we have several existing vocabulary types for solving other problem classes (`std::function`, `std::any`). In this proposal, we consider the addition of a `std::any_iterator` class template that solves this problem for the case of iterators.

### Example Usage
Consider the previous example code. With the existance of a `std::any_iterator` class template, this would instead look something like:

```c++
// application_algorithm.h
struct SomeUDT {
    void getSomeObjects(
        std::any_output_iterator<Object> d_outputObjects,
        std::any_input_iterator<std::string_view> namesFirst,
        std::any_input_iterator<std::string_view> namesLast);
};

// application_algorithm.cpp
void SomeUDT::getSomeObjects(
    std::any_output_iterator<Object> d_outputObjects, 
    std::any_input_iterator<std::string_view> namesFirst,
    std::any_input_iterator<std::string_view> namesLast)
{
    while (namesFirst != namesLast) {
        *d_outputObjects++ = getObject(*namesFirst);
        ++namesFirst;
    }
}

// some_caller.cpp
std::map<std::string_view, Object> objectMap;
SomeUDT udt;

template <auto Projector>
using ProjectionIterator = projection_iterator<Projector>;
using ValueType = decltype(objectMap)::value_type;
udt.getSomeObjects(
    ProjectionIterator<&ValueType::second>(begin(objectMap)), 
    ProjectionIterator<&ValueType::first>(begin(objectMap)),
    ProjectionIterator<&ValueType::first>(end(objectMap)));
```

We have shifted most of the complexity from the caller to the callee, reducing duplication of effort by consumers of this component. We have done this without breaking any pre-existing physical encapsulation. In this case, we may even get a non-negligible performance improvement from not having to construct a `std::string` for each of the names.

It is worth noting that implicit conversion can occur along the standard iterator hierarchy (e.g. an `any_random_access_iterator` can be used to construct a `any_bidirectional_iterator`, which in turn can be used to construct a `any_output_iterator`).

Here we have also made use of the alias templates which are also proposed here:

- `std::any_input_iterator`
- `std::any_output_iterator`
- `std::any_forward_iterator`
- `std::any_bidirectional_iterator`
- `std::any_random_access_iterator`

_Note that these are formally defined in the wording section below._

### Memory Allocation
It is worth noting that as with any type-erased mechanism, allocation is often needed (the existance of a small-buffer optimization can help to mitigate this, but never remove it).

Following the example given by removal of the `std::allocator_arg_t` constructors for `std::function` and their lack of inclusion in `std::any`, we have not included them for `std::any_iterator`.

It is possible that polymorphic memory resources, i.e. std::pmr::memory_resource-derived classes could be useful in providing customizable allocation behaviour. However, as this was neither used in design of std::any nor retroactively applied to std::function it is not a part of this proposal.

_N.B. There is a branch on the github repository that this proposal is located in that contains a version of this proposal and a sample implementation using `std::pmr::memory_resource`._

### User-defined Types
Whilst I anticipate that most use-cases will be satisfied with the existing `any_iterator` which is fully compatible with the STL iterator categories, there are projects which extend, or use different iterator categories. For these projects (such as Boost.Iterator), it would be a valid customization point for them to specialize the `std::any_iterator` class for their iterator category as it would be a UDT. 

### Alternatives
The following are alternative solutions to this problem:

- Instead of having a single `std::any_iterator` with member functions using SFINAE to remove operations that are not appropriate for each particular class of iterator, have 5 separate classes (`std::any_input_iterator`, `std::any_output_iterator`, `std::any_forward_iterator`, `std::any_bidirectional_iterator`, `std::any_random_access_iterator`).
- Provide a more generic type-erasure mechanism within the standard library that would make it trivial for users to write their own correct and performant `any_iterator`. Perhaps this would take the form of something like:  
  ```c++
  std::opaque<Concept> obj(somethingModellingConcept);
  ```
  where `std::opaque` would deduce from `Concept` the necessary members. This would require extensive changes to the core language and would provide a much more generic and powerful tool than proposed here. It may not even be possible.

## Prior Art
Analogous classes exist in various other places within the C++ community:

- Thomas Becker's `any_iterator` 
- Adobe's ASL has a suite of type-erased iterator classes for each of the STL iterator tags.
- Boost has an `any_iterator` internally which is used to implement Boost.Ranges `any_range`.
- As an example of how to use the `dyno` library, there is an `any_iterator` class.
- There is an ACCU article from July 2000 detailing how to create a simple `any_iterator` class.

I have also been informally told that analogous classes exist in various libraries within enterprises where C++ is extensively used.

## Impact on the standard
This proposal is a pure library extension. It requires addition of a new standard library header `<any_iterator>`, no modifications to other headers are required.

### Interaction with Ranges
It is worth noting at this point that both Boost.Range and ranges v3 have an `any_range` class, which acts as a type-erased range adapter. It is likely that such a class would be added to the ISO C++ standard at a later date, in this event, having a pre-existing `any_iterator` would ease the burden of implementation on standard library vendors and ease the burden of specification on LEWG.

It is also notable that the Ranges specification describes ranges in terms of iterators and _sentinels_. Within the range v3 library there is an `any_sentinel` class, which is used to mark the end of a type-erased range. However, implementing this is impossible without storage of a type-erased range. 

### Interaction with Modules
The proposed Modules TS will provide a methodology for providing componentization of large-scale C++ software projects. This helps with physical encapsulation, but does not fully mitigate the code-bloat, OOP and compilation-time issues for the iteration case resolved by this proposal.

## Wording
### Synopsis of `<any_iterator>` header
```c++
namespace std {
    template <typename IteratorCategory, typename ValueType,
          typename ReferenceType, typename PointerType,
          typename DifferenceType>
    struct any_iterator {
        // TYPES
        using value_type = ValueType;
        using reference = ReferenceType;
        using pointer = PointerType;
        using difference_type = DifferenceType;
        using iterator_category = IteratorCategory;

        // CREATORS
        any_iterator() noexcept;
            // SFINAE'd out unless ForwardIterator

        any_iterator(const any_iterator&);
        any_iterator(any_iterator&&);

        template <typename It>
        any_iterator(It it);

        template <typename OtherAnyIterator>
        any_iterator(OtherAnyIterator&& other_any_iterator);

        ~any_iterator();

        // OBSERVERS
        void* base() const noexcept;

        reference operator*() const;
        /*unspecified*/ operator->() const;
            // SFINAE'd out unless InputIterator

        reference operator[](difference_type offset) const;
        any_iterator operator+(difference_type offset) const;
        any_iterator operator-(difference_type offset) const;
        difference_type operator-(const any_iterator& rhs) const;
            // SFINAE'd out unless RandomAccessIterator

        // COMPARISON OPERATORS
        bool operator==(const any_iterator& rhs) const;
        bool operator!=(const any_iterator& rhs) const;
            // SFINAE'd out unless InputIterator

        bool operator<(const any_iterator& rhs) const;
        bool operator>(const any_iterator& rhs) const;
        bool operator<=(const any_iterator& rhs) const;
        bool operator>=(const any_iterator& rhs) const;
            // SFINAE'd out unless RandomAccessIterator

        // MODIFIERS
        void swap(any_iterator& other);

        any_iterator& operator++();

        any_iterator& operator*();
            // SFINAE'd out unless OutputIterator
        any_iterator& operator=(value_type value);
            // SFINAE'd out unless OutputIterator

        any_iterator operator++(int);
            // SFINAE'd out unless ForwardIterator

        any_iterator& operator--();
        any_iterator operator--(int);
            // SFINAE'd out unless BidirectionalIterator

        any_iterator& operator+=(difference_type offset);
        any_iterator& operator-=(difference_type offset);
            // SFINAE'd out unless RandomAccessIterator

    private:
        BufferType d_buffer; // Exposition Only
    };

    template <typename It>
    any_iterator(It) -> any_iterator<
        typename iterator_traits<It>::iterator_category,
        typename iterator_traits<It>::value_type,
        typename iterator_traits<It>::reference,
        typename iterator_traits<It>::pointer,
        typename iterator_traits<It>::difference_type
    >;

    // Free functions
    template <typename IteratorCategory, typename ValueType,
              typename Reference, typename Pointer, typename DifferenceType>
    void swap(
        any_iterator<IteratorCategory, ValueType, Reference,
            Pointer, DifferenceType>& lhs,
        any_iterator<IteratorCategory, ValueType, Reference,
            Pointer, DifferenceType>& rhs);

    template <typename IteratorCategory, typename ValueType,
              typename Reference, typename Pointer, typename DifferenceType>
    any_iterator<IteratorCategory, ValueType, Reference,
        Pointer, DifferenceType> operator+(DifferenceType offset, const any_iterator<IteratorCategory,
            ValueType, Reference, Pointer, DifferenceType>& rhs);

    // Alias templates
    template <typename ValueType,
              typename Reference = ValueType&, 
              typename Pointer = ValueType*, 
              typename DifferenceType = std::ptrdiff_t>
    using any_input_iterator = any_iterator<std::input_iterator_tag, ValueType, Reference, 
        Pointer, DifferenceType>;
    template <typename ValueType,
              typename Reference = ValueType&, 
              typename Pointer = ValueType*, 
              typename DifferenceType = std::ptrdiff_t>
    using any_output_iterator = any_iterator<std::output_iterator_tag, ValueType, Reference, 
        Pointer, DifferenceType>;
    template <typename ValueType,
              typename Reference = ValueType&, 
              typename Pointer = ValueType*, 
              typename DifferenceType = std::ptrdiff_t>
    using any_forward_iterator = any_iterator<std::forward_iterator_tag, ValueType, Reference, 
        Pointer, DifferenceType>;
    template <typename ValueType,
              typename Reference = ValueType&, 
              typename Pointer = ValueType*, 
              typename DifferenceType = std::ptrdiff_t>
    using any_bidirectional_iterator = any_iterator<std::bidirectional_iterator_tag, ValueType, Reference, 
        Pointer, DifferenceType>;
    template <typename ValueType,
              typename Reference = ValueType&, 
              typename Pointer = ValueType*, 
              typename DifferenceType = std::ptrdiff_t>
    using any_random_access_iterator = any_iterator<std::random_access_iterator_tag, ValueType, Reference, 
        Pointer, DifferenceType>;
}
```

### Specification
#### Class template `any_iterator` [any_iterator]
##### Class template `any_iterator` constructors [any_iterator.ctor]
`any_iterator() noexcept`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Constructs an empty `any_iterator`, equivalent to the singular iterator for `ForwardIterator`.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This constructor shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `input_iterator_tag`.

`any_iterator(const any_iterator& other)`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Copy-constructs an `any_iterator` from `other`, such that the underlying iterator is formed by copy-construction from the underlying iterator of `other`.

`any_iterator(any_iterator&& other)`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Move-constructs an `any_iterator` from `other`, such that the underlying iterator is formed by move-construction from the underlying iterator of `other`.

`template <typename It> any_iterator(It it)`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Constructs an `any_iterator` with a type-erased underlying iterator of type `It` move-constructed from `it`.   
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This constructor only participates in overload resolution if the conditions for the `OtherAnyIterator` constructor are not met and `It` satisfies the appropriate concept form of `iterator_category`. For instance, if `iterator_category` is `output_iterator_tag` then `It` must satisfy the `OutputIterator` concept for this constructor to participate in overload resolution.

`template <typename OtherAnyIterator>`  
`any_iterator(OtherAnyIterator&& other_any_iterator)`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Constructs an `any_iterator` from `other` such that the underlying iterator is formed by construction from forwarding the underlying iterator of `other` using the value category of `other_any_iterator`.     
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This constructor shall only participate in overload resolution if `OtherAnyIterator` is an `any_iterator` whose `iterator_category` is a derived-class of `iterator_category` and all other template parameters are the same.

##### Class template `any_iterator` observers [any_iterator.observers]
`void* base() const noexcept`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Returns a pointer to the underlying iterator whose type has been erased by this `any_iterator`. If called on a singular iterator, this will return the null pointer.

`reference operator*() const;`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Returns a `reference` to the result of dereferencing the underlying iterator.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The `any_iterator` shall be valid and contain a dereferencable underlying iterator. Otherwise the behaviour is undefined.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `input_iterator_tag`.

`/*unspecified*/ operator->() const;`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Returns an unspecified object which implements `operator->` such that the end result is as if the user had called `operator->` directly on the underlying iterator.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The `any_iterator` shall be valid and contain a dereferencable underlying iterator. Otherwise the behaviour is undefined.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `input_iterator_tag`.

`reference operator[](difference_type offset) const;`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Returns the equivalent of the expression `*(*this + offset)`.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The `any_iterator` shall be valid and upon being advanced by `offset` shall be dereferencable; otherwise the behaviour is undefined.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `random_access_iterator_tag`.

`any_iterator operator+(difference_type offset) const`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Returns an `any_iterator` containing the result of `UnderlyingIterator(*this) + offset`.   
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The `any_iterator` shall be valid and upon being advanced by `offset` shall be valid; otherwise the behaviour is undefined.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `random_access_iterator_tag`.

`any_iterator operator-(difference_type offset) const`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Returns an `any_iterator` containing the result of `UnderlyingIterator(*this) - offset`.   
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The `any_iterator` shall be valid and upon retreating by `offset` shall be valid; otherwise the behaviour is undefined.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `random_access_iterator_tag`.

`difference_type operator-(const any_iterator& rhs) const`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Returns the distance between `*this` and `rhs` as computed by using `operator-` on their underlying iterators.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The underlying iterators of `*this` and `rhs` must be of the same type and it must be valid to call `operator-` with both as arguments.    
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `random_access_iterator_tag`.

##### Class template `any_iterator` comparison operators [any_iterator.compare]
`bool operator==(const any_iterator& rhs) const;`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Compares the underlying iterators of `*this` and `rhs` for equality.    
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The `any_iterator` shall be valid and the underlying iterators of `*this` and `rhs` should have the same type and be equality comparable.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `input_iterator_tag`.


`bool operator!=(const any_iterator& rhs) const;`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Compares the underlying iterators of `*this` and `rhs` for inequality.    
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The `any_iterator` shall be valid and the underlying iterators of `*this` and `rhs` should have the same type and be equality comparable.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `input_iterator_tag`.


`bool operator<(const any_iterator& rhs) const;`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Compares the underlying iterators of `*this` and `rhs` using `operator<`.    
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The `any_iterator` shall be valid and the underlying iterators of `*this` and `rhs` should have the same type and be less-than comparable.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `random_access_iterator_tag`.

`bool operator>(const any_iterator& rhs) const;`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Compares the underlying iterators of `*this` and `rhs` using `operator>`.    
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The `any_iterator` shall be valid and the underlying iterators of `*this` and `rhs` should have the same type and be greater-than comparable.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `random_access_iterator_tag`.

`bool operator<=(const any_iterator& rhs) const;`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Compares the underlying iterators of `*this` and `rhs` using `operator<=`.    
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The `any_iterator` shall be valid and the underlying iterators of `*this` and `rhs` should have the same type and be less-than and equality comparable.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `random_access_iterator_tag`.

`bool operator>=(const any_iterator& rhs) const;`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Compares the underlying iterators of `*this` and `rhs` using `operator>=`.    
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The `any_iterator` shall be valid and the underlying iterators of `*this` and `rhs` should have the same type and be greater-than and equality comparable.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `random_access_iterator_tag`.

##### Class template `any_iterator` modifiers [any_iterator.modify]
`void swap(any_iterator& other)`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Swaps the underlying iterators of `*this` and `other`.

`any_iterator& operator++()`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Increments the underlying iterator of `*this`.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The underlying iterator should be incrementable.

`any_iterator& operator*()`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: No-op, returns a reference to `*this`.    
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `output_iterator_tag`.

`any_iterator& operator=(value_type value)`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Assigns `value` to the underlying iterator as if by `*UnderlyingIterator(*this) = std::move(value)`.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The underlying iterator shall be valid and assignable.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `output_iterator_tag`.

`any_iterator operator++(int)`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Makes a copy of `*this`, increments `*this` then returns the copy.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The underlying iterator shall be incrementable.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `forward_iterator_tag`.

`any_iterator& operator--()`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Decrements the underlying iterator of `*this`.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The underlying iterator shall be decrementable.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `bidirectional_iterator_tag`.

`any_iterator operator--(int)`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Makes a copy of `*this`, decrements `*this` then returns the copy.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: The underlying iterator shall be decrementable.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `bidirectional_iterator_tag`.

`any_iterator& operator+=(difference_type offset)`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Advances the underlying iterator of `*this` by `offset` by calling `operator+=`.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: It is valid to advance the underlying iterator of `*this` by `offset`.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `random_access_iterator_tag`.

`any_iterator& operator-=(difference_type offset)`  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Effects_: Retreats the underlying iterator of `*this` by `offset` by calling `operator-=`.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Requires_: It is valid to retreat the underlying iterator of `*this` by `offset`.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_Remarks_: This operator shall not participate in overload resolution unless `iterator_category` is derived from `random_access_iterator_tag`.

## Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the members of the BSI panel for their feedback on early drafts of this paper. 

## References
- Boost.Range (`any_range`) - https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_67_0/libs/range/doc/html/range/reference/ranges/any_range.html  
- Thomas Becker's `any_iterator` implementation - http://thbecker.net/free_software_utilities/type_erasure_for_cpp_iterators/any_iterator.html
- Adobe ASL's `any_iterator` - http://stlab.adobe.com/classadobe_1_1any__iterator.html
- Dyno example `any_iterator` - https://github.com/ldionne/dyno/blob/master/example/any_iterator.cpp
- ACCU Article describing an `any_iterator` - https://accu.org/index.php/journals/479
